# Baltimore Climate Project Data Findings

This working document describes the ongoing analysis of statistical information in support of the Baltimore Climate and Health Project, which is examining how climate change-driven temperature increases are affecting the health of people in the city.

## Significant and interesting top-line findings from our original analysis

* Air temperature is not distributed equally in Baltimore.  Some neighborhoods are much hotter than others, as much as 10 degrees in the summer. The hottest are concentrated in East Baltimore, centered on McElderry Park.
* Tree cover is not distributed equally either.  Some neighborhoods are essentially forest-like, while others are nearly-bare landscapes of concrete, pavement and buildings.  The barest neighborhoods are concentrated in East Baltimore, centered on McElderry Park.
* In Baltimore, there is a strong linear relationship between a neighborhood's level of tree cover and its ambient temperature.  Tree-heavy neighborhoods (in suburb-like Northwest Baltimore) are much cooler, with temperature variations almost entirely attributable to tree cover differences.
* Hotter areas, with less tree cover, have higher rates of chronic conditions that are affected by heat (asthma, COPD, heart disease, diabetes), compared with cooler areas.
* In Baltimore, the percentage of the city covered by tree canopy has indeed increased over the last decade, by about 3 percentage points in a CNS analysis, slightly larger than the 1 percentage point growth estimated by the city.  
* But that tree cover growth was not distributed equally.  In short, the neighborhoods that saw the largest gains in tree cover were those that already had the largest tree canopies. Many areas lost ground. More than a third of blocks in Baltimore lost treecover over the last decade, even as the city saw an overall gain.
* **Note: health findings being updated now, coming soon**

## Heat by Neighborhood

In Baltimore, air temperature is not distributed equally across neighborhoods.  Some neighborhoods are much hotter than others, with a difference of 10 degrees (F) between the hottest and coolest neighborhoods.

#### Findings

* The hottest neighborhood in the city (as measured by median afternoon temperature) is McElderry Park, in East Baltimore, at 99.3 degrees. It was also the hottest neighborhood by median morning temperature (81.1 degrees). It was the third hottest neighborhood by median evening temperature (92.4 degrees), just behind nearby Patterson Place (92.6) and Dunbar-Broadway (92.6).
* Seven of the city's top 10 neighborhoods, as measured by median afternoon temperature, are in a tight cluster of neighborhoods around McElderry Park in East Baltimore.
* The coolest neighborhoods in the city (as measured by median afternoon temperature), is Gwynns Falls/Leakin Park (89.3) and Dickeyville (90.4) at the western edge of the city.

#### About the analysis
To reach these conclusions, Capital News Service analyzed ambient temperature raster data collected by climate researchers at the School of Urban Studies and Planning at Portland State University and the Science Museum of Virginia. [Link to original data and academic paper](https://osf.io/ur7my/).  Using sensors strapped to cars, researchers drove around the city on August 29, 2018 and collected data during three one-hour periods: in the morning, afternoon and night. They used machine learning (a random forest regression) to fill in small gaps, creating a hyper-detailed picture of temperatures across the city in 10 square meter blocks.  They coolest 10 square meter block they detected in Baltimore was 72 degrees, and the hottest was 105.

Using raster files provided by the researchers, Capital News Service used QGIS to calculate the mean, median, min and max temperature for each of the three time periods (am, afternoon and pm) for five levels of geography (citywide; by U.S. Census blocks; by ZCTA, a form of ZIP Code generated by the Census; by Neighborhood Statistical Area, a representation of official city neighborhood boundaries composed of Census blocks; and by Community Statistical Area, a collection of one or more Baltimore neighborhoods that align with Census tracts)

#### Maps and Graphs
Links coming soon.

## Hottest Neighborhood Trends/Descriptions

In Baltimore, the hottest areas look very different than the coolest neighborhoods, the analysis found.  

#### Findings

* People in the hottest neighborhoods are less likely to own their home, meaning they have less agency to make changes to their home.  They have a lower percentage of owner-occupied properties than the coolest neighborhoods (r=-.64). (See below for an explanation of r values, statistical relationships and correlation). In Madison/East End, a Community Statistical Area that contains half of McElderry Park and parts of other neighborhoods, the median afternoon temperature is 98.4 degrees, the highest in the city and nearly 10 degrees higher than the median afternoon temperature in Dickeyville/Franklintown, 89.9 degrees. The percentage of owner-occupied properties was 30 percent in Madison/East End, compared with 63 percent in Dickeyville/Franklintown.
* The hottest neighborhoods have higher crime rates when compared with the coolest neighborhoods.  They have higher violent crime rates (r=.55), higher property crime rates (r=.50), shootings (r = .40), gun homicides (r=.39) and drug calls (r=.34). The violent crime rate was 28.7 per 1,000 residents in Madison/East End, compared with 9 per 1,000 residents in Dickeyville/Franklintown.
* The hottest neighborhoods have higher poverty rates when compared with the coolest neighborhoods. They have higher rates of families below the poverty line (r=.38), kids below the poverty line (r=.34) and more households earning less than $25,000 per year (r=.36).  The percentage of families living in poverty was 33.8 percent in Madison/East End, compared with 17.4 percent in Dickeyville/Franklintown.
* The hottest neighborhoods have higher unemployment rates than the coolest neighborhoods (.33).The unemployment rate in Madison/East End was 21.9 percent in 2017, compared with 3.4 percent in Dickeyville/Franklintown.   
* In the hottest neighborhoods, people are more likely to be exposed to extreme heat on the way to work because of commuting factors.  They are less likely to have a vehicle (r=.50), more likely to walk to work (r=.43), and more likely to use public transportation to get to work (r=.41). Their neighborhoods are also considered "more walkable", with higher "walk scores" than cooler neighborhoods (r=.65). The percentage of the population that uses public transportation to get to work in Madison/East End was 34 percent in 2017, compared with 13 percent in Dickeyville/Franklintown.
* In the hottest neighborhoods, people die on average earlier than people in the coolest neighborhoods, with lower life expectancy correlation: (r=-.40). The average life expectancy is 68.7 in Madison/East End, compared with 74.4 in Dickeyville/Franklintown.
* The hottest neighborhoods are in greater state of disrepair than the coolest neighborhoods. The have a higher rate of dirty streets and alleys (r=.62), a higher rate of vacant properties (r=.43), a higher rate of vacant properties owned by the city (r=.43), and a higher rate of properties with housing violations (r=.46). The percentage of residential properties that are vacant in Madison/East End is 19.4 percent, compared with 1.6 in Dickeyville/Franklintown.

#### About the analysis
The analysis was done by examining statistical relationships between geographic variations in heat and geographic variations in demographic and structural factors. Because reliable demographic information was not available at the neighborhood level, we used Community Statistical Areas, collections of neighborhoods, for this analysis.  

We examined correlation levels between heat and a variety of demographic and structural features - race, income, poverty, crime, housing, employment. Correlation coefficient values (r) range from 1 (a perfect linear correlation) to 0 (no correlation) to -1 (a perfect inverse correlation). We also assessed statistical significance (p). We used the following guidelines in assessing the results.     

* ±1 - perfect linear relationship
* > ±0.75 - very strong linear relationship
* > ±0.50 - strong linear relationship
* > ±0.25 - weak-moderate linear relationship.
* 0 - no relationship
* Results with p >= .05 were discarded

Importantly, we are not suggesting causal relationships, that heat *caused* in whole or in part any of the factors we report here.  That analysis may be done at a later date.  We are simply saying that as heat rises, other factors also tend to rise or fall along similar lines.  This analysis is therefore a method of describing how neighrhoods differ as temperatures rise and fall.

#### Maps and Graphs
Coming soon

## Heat and Health




## Trees
In Baltimore, trees are also not distributed equally across the city.  There is extremely wide variation in the amount of land area in each neighborhood covered by tree canopy.  

#### Findings
* Of Baltimore's 278 neighborhoods, the neighborhood with the lowest amount of treecover is Patterson Park Neighborhood, just south of McElderry Park in East Baltimore, with 4 percent tree cover (using our stricter definition of tree canopy), not including two industrial areas (Dundalk Marine Terminal and Curtis Bay Industrial Area). McElderry Park is 8th lowest, with 1.6 percent, not including Dundalk Marine Terminal, Curtis Bay Industrial Area and Canton Industrial Area.  
* Of Baltimore's 278 neighborhoods, the neighborhoods with the most treecover are Gwynn Falls/Leakin Park (81 percent, this may just be a forest/park), Franklintown (61 percent), Original Northwood (59 percent), Coldspring (58 percent), Guilford (between 55 percent).
* In general, the most heavily treed areas are in the north and west of the city.

#### About the Analysis
Detailed description coming soon

#### Maps and Graphs
Coming Soon

## Trees and Heat
here is a clear inverse linear relationship between a neighborhood's tree cover and heat.  Simply put, the hottest neighborhoods in Baltimore are those with the least amount of tree cover.

#### Findings.

* There is an extremely strong inverse linear relationship between a neighborhood's median temperature and tree canopy. It is hard to get correlation levels stronger than these. The hottest neighborhoods in Baltimore are those with the least amount of tree cover.
* For tree canopy cover in 2017-18 (using our more permissive definition of tree cover), the correlation with median morning temperature (r=-.97), median afternoon temperature (r=-.86) and median evening temperature  (r=-.93) was very strong.  
* For tree canopy cover in 2017-18 (using our stricter definition of tree cover), the correlation with median morning temperature (r=-.94), median afternoon temperature (r=-.86) and median evening temperature (r=-.93) was also very strong.   

#### About the analysis
Detailed description of analysis method coming soon.

#### Maps and Graphs
Coming Soon

## Trees and Growth
Details TK.  Analysis done, need to input.
